# Predicting-survival-risk-in-hnsc-carcinoma
The beginning of most HNSCC is in the  mucus membranes that line the inside of the mouth, nostrils, and throat. Squamous cells make up these membranes so the cancers growing within these cells are referred to as squamous cell carcinomas. Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma is the 6th among the category of most common cancers in the world with 450,000 reported deaths and 890,000 rising cases in 2018. Mostly affects people over the age of 50 and in men, the rate is twice as in women. For diagnosis, 66 years is the median age of non-viral HNSCC, while it is 53 years and 50 years respectively for human papillomavirus (HPV)-positive and Epstein–Barr virus (EBV)-related cancers.
The excessive occurrence of these in areas along with Australia and Southeast Asia is related to the intake of carcinogenic products like  betel quid, aforementioned tobacco, areca nut,  alcohol, smokeless tobacco, and slaked lime. At the molecular level, HNSCC related to HPV is different from HNSCC associated with tobacco (HPV-negative) and their treatment should be according to their subtype.
HPV harbors oncoproteins E6 and E7 (causes HNSCC) which are linked to an increase in copy number of somatic variants. TRAF3 gene is either shortened or deleted in HPV- positive HNSCC and it codes for a protein that is  responsible for the regulation of immune response. Production of E2F transcription factor family members involved in cell cycle regulation is increased with the amplification of the E2F1 gene. Mutations in PIK3CA can also be seen.
In  tumors that are not associated with HPV amplifications of 11q13 and 11q22 can be seen that lead to an interaction between BIRC2 and FADD, due to which cell death is inhibited. In tumors that are associated with smoking, there are TP53 mutations, inactivation of CDKN2A, and alterations in copy number.
A prognostic marker is analyzed before treatment starts and this identifies tumor-specific molecules or histopathological characteristics which include germline or somatic mutations, changes in microRNA levels, DNA methylation, or circulating tumor cells at the blood level that are  associated with long-term outcomes. Prognostic biomarkers help in the selection of patients that require  more intensive surveillance or adjuvant therapy. Cytogenetic abnormalities can be taken as prognostic biomarkers for the diagnosis of acute myeloid leukemia(AML). Inversions, deletion, and translocation can lead to favorable prognoses like inversions in chromosome 16, translocation between chromosomes 8 and 21 as well as translocation in chromosomes 15 and 17, these all are associated with an unfavorable prognosis. With the help of prognostic markers, we can characterize various cancers and their associated survival risk. Unusual tissue or cell structure could also be used as a prognostic marker. Tumour nodal status, size, presence or absence of lymphovascular invasion, and size are commonly used as prognostic markers in breast cancer.
